# Propagation-of-drought
PPR1: Propagation from meteorological to hydrological drought in the Horn of Africa using both standardized and threshold-based indices
# Abstract
There have been numerous drought propagation studies in data-rich countries, but not much has been done for data-poor regions (such as the Horn of Africa (HOA)). In this study, we characterise meteorological, soil moisture and hydrological droughts and the propagation from one to the other for 318 catchments in the HOA to improve understanding of the spatial variability of the drought hazard. We calculate the Standardised Precipitation Index (SPI), Standardised Soil Moisture Index (SSMI) and Standardised Streamflow Index (SSI). In addition, we use the variable threshold method to calculate the duration of drought below a predefined percentile threshold for precipitation, soil moisture and discharge. The relationship between meteorological and soil moisture is investigated by finding the SPI accumulation period that has the highest correlation between SPI and SSMI and the relationship between meteorological and hydrological drought is analysed by the SPI accumulation period that has the highest correlation between SPI and SSI time series. Additionally, we calculated these relationships with the ratio between the threshold-based meteorological drought duration and soil moisture drought duration, and the relation between threshold-based meteorological drought duration and streamflow drought duration. Finally, we investigate the influence of climate and catchment characteristics on these propagation metrics. The results show that (1) the propagation from SPI to SSMI and the mean drought duration ratio of meteorological to soil moisture (P/SM) are mainly influenced by soil properties and vegetation, with the short accumulation periods (1 to 4 months) of SPI in catchments with arable land, high mean annual precipitation, and low sand and silt content, while longer accumulations (5 to 7 months) are in catchments with low mean annual upstream precipitation and shrub vegetation; (2) the propagation from SPI to SSI and precipitation to streamflow duration ratio are highly influenced by the climate and catchment control, i.e., geology, elevation and landcover, with the short accumulation times in catchments with high annual precipitation, volcanic permeable geology, and cropland, and the longer accumulations in catchments with low annual precipitation, sedimentary rocks and shrubland; and (3) the influence of mean annual upstream precipitation is more important for the propagation from SPI to SSI than from SPI to SSMI. Additionally, precipitation accumulation periods of approximately 1 to 4 months in wet western areas of HOA, and of approximately 5 to 7 months in the more dryland regions are found. This can guide forecasting and management efforts as different drought metrics are thus of importance in different regions.
